#summary Character I/O oriented classes.
#labels Phase-Implementation,draft
= Introduction =
These classes address `character I/O`: they are subclasses of `Reader` and `Writer`.

= [http://io-tools.googlecode.com/svn/www/easystream/apidocs/index.html?com/gc/iotools/stream/reader/package-summary.html Readers] =

== !ReaderFromWriter ==
This class allow to read the data written to an Writer from an Reader.

To use this class users must subclass it and implement the abstract method produce(Writer). The data who is produced inside this function can be written to the sink Writer passed as a parameter. Later it can be read back from from the ReaderFromWriter class (whose ancestor is java.io.Reader ).

{{{
 final String dataId=//id of some data.
 final ReaderFromWriter<String> rfw
                          = new ReaderFromWriter<String>() {
   @Override
   public String produce(final Writer dataSink) throws Exception {
      //call your application function who produces the data here
      //WARNING: we're in another thread here, so this method shouldn't
      //write any class field or make assumptions on the state of the class.
      return produceMydata(dataId,dataSink)
   }
 };
  try {
    //now you can read from the Reader the data that was written to the
    //dataSink Writer
     char[] read=IOUtils.toCharArray(rfw);
     //Use data here
   } catch (final IOException e) {
     //Handle exception here
   } finally {
   rfw.close();
 }
 //You can get the result of produceMyData after the stream has been closed.
 String resultOfProduction = rfw.getResult();
}}}

This class encapsulates a pipe and a Thread, hiding the complexity of using them. It is possible to select different strategies for allocating the internal thread or even specify the ExecutorService for thread execution.


= [http://io-tools.googlecode.com/svn/www/easystream/apidocs/com/gc/iotools/stream/writer/package-frame.html Writers] =
== !CloseOnceWriter ==

For further information read the [http://io-tools.googlecode.com/svn/www/easystream/apidocs/com/gc/iotools/stream/writer/CloseShieldWriter.html api javadoc].


== !CloseShieldWriter ==

For further information read the [http://io-tools.googlecode.com/svn/www/easystream/apidocs/com/gc/iotools/stream/writer/CloseShieldWriter.html api javadoc].

== !TeeWriter ==


For further information read the [http://io-tools.googlecode.com/svn/www/easystream/apidocs/com/gc/iotools/stream/writer/TeeWriter.html api javadoc].

== !WriterToReader ==

For further information read the [http://io-tools.googlecode.com/svn/www/easystream/apidocs/com/gc/iotools/stream/writer/WriterToReader.html api javadoc].
 